The Joe Rogan experience. Is this a,
is this something that you still truly enjoy doing?
I wouldn't say I ever enjoyed doing it really. I mean, I enjoy life.
I enjoy just, you know, staring at the sky from my hot tub.
It's just that I want to carry on doing it rather than, you know, dying instead.
So almost an amazement, it's an investment, but it's also, I mean,
it's obviously some sort of an intellectual person.
No, not really. That's humanitarian pursuits. I mean,
some people view it as an intellectual pursuit, but I don't, I really fail,
you know, I've ever, ever since I was a young kid,
I have wanted to spend my life making a difference to the world,
improving the quality. And of course, in this case,
quantity of life of humanity and I've,
I'm just one of those incredibly lucky people I've been able to end up in this
position of essentially leading the crusade to do that in the biggest
possible.
So this is something that you felt compelled to do from a really early age.
Not this specific thing. So what actually happened was that as a teenager,
having pretty much decided that this is what I wanted to do with my life.
The first thing I did was I got into artificial intelligence research.
And the reason that happened was because when I was a teenager,
I tried my hand at programming. I found out it was pretty darn good at it.
And I thought, well, okay.
One of the big problems in the world is the problem of work.
The fact that people have to spend so much of that time doing stuff that they
would not do unless they were being paid for it.
And therefore we need more automation.
So I'll work on that because I'm good at it.
And I had no reason at that time to believe that I was going to be any good at
biology, but specifically, particularly,
and there were other people who were particularly good at biology and I had made
the mistaken,
but absolute assumption that everybody realized that aging was by
far the world's biggest problem.
And therefore biologists would be working on it in grinding away.
And of course he didn't hear much, but Hey, it's a really hard problem.
So that's not a surprise.
So it wasn't till my late twenties that I found out that I was wrong.
What happened with that? I met and married a biologist, quite a funny one,
actually, who was a full professor at that time at UC San Diego.
She was in England on sabbatical. And, um, through her,
I not only learned a lot of biology just by accident, you know,
over the dinner table,
but I also found out gradually that she wasn't interested in
aging. I just kind of, it hadn't occurred to me.
So it didn't come up in conversation.
I began to notice that it wasn't coming up in conversation.
I started asking questions and she would say things like, you know, well,
I mean, like it's just decay, isn't it? And I would say, well, yeah,
but so what, and she said, well, I mean,
you're not going to learn a fundamental truth about the universe from studying
decay. And I would say, well, that's true. Yes. But, but, but it's bad for you.
And she would say, but that's not my problem. And I would say, well,
it kind of is. And that would be about as far as we would ever get.
So eventually I came to terms with it because it wasn't just her,
of course it was all the other biologist that was meeting. Um.
And the strange closed-mindedness.
Well, you know, as I say,
have had to find ways not to think about H and so eventually I thought, well,
that's just won't do. And I had, I bet I switched fields.
And I happened to have, um,
invaded myself into a position where switching fields was something I was able
to do. I had a very undemanding job at the university of Cambridge doing
bioinformatics, um,
which allowed me to do my artificial intelligence for search in my spare time.
I was being paid well enough. And, you know,
I had access to the university facilities and all that.
So all I needed to do was repurpose my spare time and, you know,
paying my way to go to conferences because of course back then nobody knew me
and I wasn't being invited. Um, and, um, so I, I know it went pretty well.
I started doing quite well received stuff. Uh, and, uh,
so I became quite well respected in the field very quickly. Um,
and for the first five years, that was all that was happening.
Cause I was basically harmless and it was then five years in,
in the year 2000 that I had this kind of Eureka moment,
fat damaged repair was the way to go and stay talking about what the impact
could be.
And people started to think I had gone completely crazy and it took a little
while for people to, um, come around.
So w when you say that, uh, at an early age,
you felt compelled to try to help people, like what, what was.
So what actually happened was this,
it was all down to my mother's desire for me to practice
the piano. Um, you know, she, wasn't a particularly good pianist herself,
but she wanted me to learn how to black, how piano. And so she was,
she put pressure on me to practice all the time and I was resistant,
but somehow or other,
my mother had already instilled in me a sense of introspection, you know,
a desire to understand why I thought what I thought.
So I actually decided to think about why I didn't want to play the piano.
And it took very little time for me to realize that the fundamental reason that
I didn't want to spend so much time tapping away on this thing with the
best case scenario, outcome of this would be that I would become a good pianist.
And that was just not good enough, you know,
because there were already lots of other good pianists. So I would not be,
you know,
contributing significantly to the quality of life of mankind by becoming just
another one and additional That's right. And so I thought, well, I won't do,
but could have.
And of course this was gradual after that probably eight or nine.
Um, so over the next few years,
I'm going to say this general idea that I playing the piano was a waste of time,
um,
crystallized into the understanding that I could actually articulate that
I wanted to make a difference to the world. And, um, so that's how I, you know,
by the time I was 15 was when I started programming and I've just taught you the
rest.
That's an interesting mapping out of your future, you know, at nine years old,
recognize that you're not going to make a significant contribution to the world
by doing something that other people have already done. Yeah, that's right.
That's a really interesting way to look at the world where you're nine.
I have a nine-year-old daughter. I can't imagine her thinking like that.
I mean, when I started, um,
working actually at this bioinformatics project that I mentioned, um, I came,
I had a lot of exposure to a lot of top flight biologists
and it turns out that there were fields that were just fashionable.
Right? Yeah.
And lots of top biologists would be competing for separately with each other to
make the next advance in one particular narrow,
narrow area that was just really fashionable and other areas would be completely
neglected. And I thought, well, if going on here,
why are these smart people choosing to do something
that minimizes the likelihood that they having an impact? In other words,
basically, whatever they, whatever they find out,
they didn't matter. They themselves didn't matter at all,
because they could have been hit by a truck or done something a bit different
than someone else would have found out the exact same thing, 10 minutes later.
So they were making no difference. I never understood.
I still don't understand it.
So you've always felt compelled to make a difference.
Is that something that your mother instilled in you?
Is it something you just had? Is that, yeah.
Well, I don't really think my mother instilled in me.
I think the introspection was, and I, I, if you ask me how she did that,
I had no idea, but, um, but yeah, somehow,
nah, I don't think that, um, um, but no, I think the, um,
the wanting to make a difference, he just intrinsic in me.
And that's something that I just realized as a result of the introspection.
When you look back at that now that's gotta be an interesting course where you
you've recognized at a very young age that you wanted to make some sort of a
difference.
But th knowing that you had had that epiphany at a young age,
when it comes to like being a pianist or,
or doing something that's going to significantly impact people that is not a
standard path, that many people are gone. That's a,
it's a very interesting way to set up your life.
Well, I wouldn't say I sat my life up. I say, I would say I had intentions,
but if we look at how I got from there to here,
[inaudible] enormous amount of, it was just sheer luck. Right. I mean, you know,
people's lives. Right, exactly. So I would say, you know, I had a,
I had a hope I had a, you know, general aspiration,
but, you know, I would say that, um,
I'm just incredibly privileged to have been able to reach the pinnacle of my
chosen field of endeavor. You know, hardly, anyone can say that. Yes.
No, that is you're you're, you're also, well, you fit the part too.
You're a weirdo, you know, I mean, you know, you're a weirdo.
Suddenly, you know.
I say that with all due respect in a compliment as well. Of course.
It, it, it definitely, yeah.
It's definitely difficult to make a difference to the world if you're following
the rules. And so I'm,
I'm always instinctively looking for ways to do
things that other people might've overlooked. I mean, even trivial things.
Is there anything that frustrates you about this pursuit?
I'm not easily frustrated kind of guy. I mean,
of course sometimes it gets to me hustler, how slowly things are going,
how resistant people are, how irrational the resistance is.
But even that, you know, I've, you know,
I've already from some of the things I've already said, you understand that I'm,
I'm, I'm really sympathetic to humanity in this regard.
I understand that most people just, you know,
the psychological burden of the,
the prospect of physiological decline is so enormous
that they've got no choice. They've got to put it out of their mind. And,
you know, some people fail, I don't know, psychologically stronger or whatever,
and they can bite the bullet and actually work on this, even though it's a very,
very long haul. Uh, but some people aren't,
and that doesn't mean that they are no more,
that are less deserving of the benefits.
It's a very strange thing where people put on intellectual blinders and they're
talking about aging and dying. It is very weird.
Have you had heated discussions with other intellectuals about this?
Because I would imagine all the time. All the time.
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, the whole thing came to me first when I was at Cambridge,
actually as an undergrad, this was sometime before. Of course it's early 1980s.
Um, so when I was in my first year, I probably 1982, uh,
I brought in a stage hypnotist to do a show.
You ever seen a stage hypnosis show? Okay. So this guy, you know,
he's got an audience of a few hundred people, all of us can be undergraduates.
And, um, so the first step is, you know,
do some stuff that gets some particularly amenable
people into a light trance.
And he brings a few of them up on stage and starts to go further. Right. Um,
so there was this one particular part of the show that stuck in my mind, uh,
what happened was this one guy was brought up and got into a really,
really deep trance. And then the next step was that the hadn't this says,
okay, this is actually your right elbow. And this is your laptop. I,
they switched the guy to elbows, right? No elaboration of the continent,
the implication for there just getting the person to completely,
completely implicitly believe this thing. Right. And then he said, right.
I would like you please to touch your right elbow with your left forefinger.
Right. And so of course there was all this wrangling and writing and so on.
I couldn't do it. Right. Um, and that was funny in and of itself. Um,
but that wasn't the photographs. What happened next was the key thing. The,
he says, okay, you can stop now.
And the guy stops and says, he couldn't do Goodyear.
And the guy says now, and then they, he said,
why not ask the guy to explain why he couldn't
and here is the code across,
because what happens is the guy gives a completely unhesitating lucid,
grammatically correct explanation for why he couldn't do it.
And the explanation of course will have the hole in it, the size of Canada.
But the fact is that I won't see it.
He'll just be sitting there with a straight face just doing this.
And his friends came down to graduates, right? High IQ,
highly respect for each other's intellectual [inaudible] for their own
intellectual rationality. And, um,
and that rolling in the aisles and the guys just all affected.
So, um,
when I started to have these discussions with people about aging and started to
find out that people make these unbelievable
arguments in favor of it, um, you know, I got this right.
I call it the pro aging trance.
And it was based on that experience from my youth.